## CS 203 - Computer and Network Security
Professor : Gene Tsudik  
Quarter   : Winter 2016  

### Basic Definitions

##### Some basic security goals
* Prevention.
* Detection.
* Reaction.

##### Security services
* Confidentiality : no unauthorized information disclosed.
* Integrity : no unauthorized modification.
* Availability : information/resources cannot be withheld.
* Authenticity : no unauthorized modification of information **origin.**
* Accountability : history/logs cannot be modified, actions can be linked to
  entities.
* Reliability : continued operation after failure (accidental or malicious).
* Safety : limit impact of failures on environment.

##### Types of security
* Computer Security : protect data and resources
* Network Security : protect data during transmission
* Internet Security : protect data during transmission over a collection of 
  heterogeneous interconnected networks.

##### Security attack types
* Passive : eavesdropping
* Active  : modification of data, denial of service, replay 

## User Authentication
### Passwords
#### UNIX-Style Passwords
#### Honey Passwords
### "Cognometrics"
### Biometrics
### Challenge-Response
### Common issues

### Web Security
#### Cookies
#### Kerberos

### Named Data Networking

### Privacy and Anonymity 

#### Personalized Privacy Defaults

#### Genomic Privacy

##### Challenges

**De-anonymization**

##### Solutions

**Computation on Encrypted Genomes**

**Personal Genomic Tests**

**Semi-trusted Parties**

**Secure computation**

#### Anonymity
**Anonymity vs. Privacy**  
Anonymity is being unidentifiable within a set of subjects.  
Unlinkability - actions not linked to identity.  
Unobservability - observer doesn't know if certain action happened.

**Attacks on Anonymity**

* Passive traffic analysis
* Active traffic analysis
* Router compromise

##### Mixes
**Chaum's Mix**  
Mix is a trusted remailer who receives all messages and sends them on.  
Then senders and receivers are known, but who sent to whom is not known. 
Public key is used between sender - mix, and mix - recipient.

**Mix Cascade / MixNets**  
Sequence of mixes or network of mixes (mixnet).  
Single good mixes guarantees some degree of anonymity.  
High latency because of public keys.

##### Anonymized Routing
**Randomized Routing**  
Random routing - routers don't know if sender is "true" sender or just a router.

**Onion Routing**  
Layers of public key encryption - one layer is peeled off every time.  
Routers learn identity of next router.

**Tor**  
Like onion routing, but with symmetric keys.

**Location Hidden Servers**  
Hide the location of a server while still providing services.

Steps:

1. Server creates Tor circuits to "introduction points".
2. Server gives descriptor and intro points to a service lookup server.
3. Client obtains intro point from directory.
4. Client creates Tor circuit to a "rendezvous point".
5. Client sends address of rendezvous point to server through intro point.
6. Server connects to rendezvous point.
7. Rendezvous point matches Client and Server circuits.

**Dining Cryptographers**  
Idea: Broadcast information anonymously.  

Setup: 3 people having dinner. Either one of them paid, or the NSA paid. They
want to learn which is true.   
Each flips a coin and shows the result to the person on her left.  
Each person says whether their coin was the same or different from the one they
say.  
The person who paid lies.  

If the NSA paid, then 1 or 3 people say "same."  
If one of them paid, then 0 or 2 people say "same."

### Spam

#### SMTP

**SMTP Headers**
To / Cc / Bc (email addresses)   
From         (names)  
Sender       (email address)  
Received     (added by each transfer agent)  
Return-path  (used to identify path back to sender)  

#### Sources / Motivations / Strategies

**Email spoofing**  
Email via SMTP has no built-in authentication.  
"MAIL FROM" field is set by sender.  
Recipient's email server only sees IP address of the last peer who sent the 
message.

**Hiding source**  
Why? Avoid blacklists.

**Thin Pipe / Thick Pipe**  
HSB - high-speed broadband host.
LSZ - low speed zombie.
```
      TCP handshake
LSZ <--------------->  Target
 |						SMTP
 |  TCP Seq #'s        Server
 |
HSB ================>
     SMTP bulk mail (src = LSZ)
``` 
The HSB is protected, the LSZ is blacklisted, and the HSB moves to the next
LSZ.

**Open Relays**  
SMTP relay forwards mail to dst. Connects to SMTP via port 25, sends list of
recipients via "RCPT TO" command, sends email body, relay delivers message.
Honest relay adds correct "Received" header with source IP (not required!).

Example : Bobax worm (slow spreading) installs open relay on zombies.

**Open HTTP Proxies**

**Spambot examples** : McColo (hosting provider), Srizbi, Storm

#### Countermeasures

**Legal**  
CAN-SPAM Act (2003) - largely ineffective, no power outside US.

**Blacklists**  
Issues: most bots send very little spam, most IP's are quickly abandoned,
synchronizing blacklists (false positives are an issue).

**SPF (Sender Policy Framework)**  
Checks that domain matches IP.

**Domain Keys (DKIM)**  
Email must be signed.

**S/MIME**  
Email must be signed. (With public key from CA).

**Graylists**  
Temporary rejection of unrecognized senders. (Based on the idea that legitimate
senders will try again).

**Puzzles and CAPTCHAs**  
Meant to slow down attacker / force proof that sender is human.

### Phishing

#### Common strategies

* Confusing URLs
* URL with multiple re-direction
* HTTP rather than HTTPS
* Host on botnet zombies
* Pharming : DNS table poisoning

**HTTP Response Splitting**  
Force phishing page into the cache as a legitimate page.

**Drive-By Pharming**

**Social engineering**

#### Countermeasures

**White lists**

**PassMark / SiteKey**  
Image and phrase that you choose is displayed.

**PIN Guard / Virtual Keyboard**  
Enter PIN / password with mouse instead of keyboard.

**Scramble Pad / Bharosa Slide**
Add randomness / user knowledge to the login process.

**Warnings**  
Active warnings better than passive ones...

**PwdHash**  
Password is a hash of your desired password and the site domain.  
Usability issues...  

### Network Threats and Attacks

#### Internet Structure

**TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)**  
Sender breaks data into segments, a sequence
number is attached to every packet.  
Receiver reassembles the segments and sends
an acknowledgement for packets.  
A connection state is maintained by both.

**TCP Handshake**  
SYN is short for synchronize. It is a flag used to
initiate a TCP connection.
```
Client			Server
-----------------------
				 Listening...
      --------->  
      	SYN_c	 Spawn thread, store data.

     <---------- 
     SYN_s, ACK_c
                  Wait...
      ---------->
        ACK_s     Connected.
```

**IP (Internet Protocol)**  
IP is a connectionless, unreliable, "best-effort"
protocol.
Addresses (and address prefixes) are used for routing.

| IP Packet  |
| ---------- |
| Source     |
| Dest       |
| Sequence # |

**IP Routing**

**BGP**  
For route discovery.

**ICMP (Control Message Protocol)**  
Provides feedback about network operation.

**UDP**

**DNS (Domain Name System)**  
For IP address discovery.

#### Attacks and Solutions

**Packet Sniffing**  
Snoop on connection; read unencrypted data.

**"Smurf" Attack**  
DoS attack.  
Attacker broadcasts an ICMP Echo Request ("are you alive?"), with the source set to the victim's IP address.  
Every host replies to the victim; flood of replies overwhelms victim.
Solution: Reject external packets to broadcast addresses.  

**"Ping of Death"**
Programming error in old Windows causes machine to
crash when it receives an ICMP packet with payload
over 64k.

**"Teardrop" and "Bonk"**
Attacker modifies offset of TCP packets to: overlapping values OR very large value. Bad implementation of TCP/IP crashes with these ill-formed offsets.

**"LAND"**  
Single packet DoS.
IP packet with src = dst, and SYN flag set.
Goes into infinite loop!

**SYN Flooding**
Attacker sends many SYN's from different (spoofed) client addresses.
Server (victim) spawns many new threads but never hears back from any of them.  
Eventually, server has no more resources and must deny legitimate requests.

General problem: **asymmetry** allows attacker to do minimal work and victim must respond with hard work.

Solutions:
- **SYN Cookies** : TODO
- **Random Deletion** : If SYN queue full, simply delete any random entry. Possible for real user to be denied, but they will try again. Eventually all malicious entries will be deleted.

**TCP Connection Spoofing**  
TCP connections have state : sequence number, port number. This state is easy to guess because port numbers are standard and sequence numbers are predictable.

Why? Because if attacker knows first number and roughly how much traffic has been sent so far, he can guess a sequence number. There is tolerance for a range of sequence numbers to handle packet loss.

**Blind IP Spoofing**

**DoS by Connection Reset**

**BGP Security Issues**

**DNS Spoofing**

**Reverse DNS Spoofing**

**Pharming**

**JavaScript/DNA Intranet Attack**

**Domain Hijacking**

#### Countermeasures

**DNS Spoofing Resolution**

**DNSSEC**

### Firewalls
Firewalls are meant to protect an internal network from the "big bad" internet.

**Firewall Types**
- Packet or session-filtering router (filters)
- Proxy gateway (application-level or circuit-level)
- Personal firewall

**Packet Filtering**  
Firewall makes a per-packet decision as to whether the packet is OK. Can be based on any information about the packet (e.g., IP src/dest, port, protocol, TCP flags, ICMP message type).

Rules are based on pattern matching.

FTP - TODO

Weaknesses - TODO

**Fragmentation Attacks**

**Session Filtering**  
Decisions are made on a per-packet basis, in the wider context of a connection.  
(Can be bypassed with **IP tunneling**).

**Circuit-level Gateway**

**Application-level Gateway**

**Filtering Outbound Connections**

**Bastion Host Idea**

**General problems**

### IoT Security/Attestation

#### Motivation

**Attack types**

#### Remote Attestation
